This is not a GitHub problem.

Your deployment is timing out during this step:

“Copying development database to production database”

And your logs also show a second issue:

“Python API failed to become healthy within timeout”

So there are really 2 separate problems:

What the logs mean
1. Replit deployment is spending too long cloning the dev DB

This line is the key blocker:

Preparing development database
Copying development database to production database
Deployment timed out

That means Replit is trying to copy your development database into the deployed environment, and it is taking too long.

2. Your Python service is also slow to become healthy

These lines confirm it:

Python API failed to become healthy within timeout
port: 8000
syscall: 'connect'

So the deploy system is trying to reach your Python API on port 8000, but it is not ready fast enough.

3. Something large is still downloading during startup

This part is also important:

[python] ... 83.2M/83.2M

That looks like a model/package/resource download during startup. Even if it finishes, it is wasting precious health-check time.

Real diagnosis

Your current Replit deployment is failing because:

the database copy step is too heavy
the Python app startup is too slow
something in startup is still downloading ~83 MB
Replit’s deployment timeout is being hit before the app becomes healthy

So the issue is now deployment architecture, not code correctness.

What to do now
Best path

Do not keep retrying blind publishes.

Do these instead:

Option A — fastest fix on Replit

Make deployment as light as possible:

Stop using Replit production DB copy
If possible, make production use Neon directly
Avoid copying a Replit dev database into prod
Remove all downloads from startup
nothing should download when the app boots
models/resources must already exist, or be lazy-loaded after health check
Make /health extremely minimal
no DB-heavy check
no embeddings/model init
no OpenAI call
no large imports if avoidable
Delay heavy initialization
start server first
do warmup after startup, in background if possible
Option B — better path

Use Replit only for demo/dev, not for this deployment shape.

Your app has:

Python API
Neon DB
heavier startup logic
AI/retrieval components

That is exactly the kind of stack that becomes fragile on Replit deploys.

So the cleaner path is:

keep code on GitHub
deploy backend on Railway
keep Neon as DB
deploy frontend separately if needed
What I think is happening specifically

Most likely sequence:

Replit starts deploy
It tries to copy development DB to production
Meanwhile Python service starts
Python service still downloads or initializes something big
Health check on port 8000 misses deadline
whole deployment times out

So even though your local/dev environment works, the deployment pipeline still has too much work in boot phase.

What you should change in code right now

Ask Replit AI or edit manually with this exact goal:

1. Ensure health endpoint is trivial

Example target behavior:

returns 200 OK
maybe just { "ok": true }
no DB query required
2. Remove heavy startup code from startup

Anything like:

model download
embedding warmup
large file fetch
DB migrations
data sync
background indexing

should not run before health is green.

3. Check for downloads in Python startup

That 83.2M log strongly suggests something is still being fetched.
Search for:

huggingface
fastembed
sentence_transformers
download
snapshot_download
from_pretrained
4. Confirm the server binds correctly

Make sure Python runs on:

host="0.0.0.0", port=8000
Exact message to send Replit AI

Paste this:

Deployment still times out. The logs show:
- "Copying development database to production database" takes too long
- "Python API failed to become healthy within timeout"
- startup still downloads about 83.2 MB before health is green

Please make deployment boot minimal:
1. Ensure /health returns 200 immediately with no heavy checks
2. Remove all downloads/model initialization from startup
3. Defer any warmup until after the server is already listening
4. Confirm Python binds to 0.0.0.0:8000
5. Avoid any startup path that depends on copying or preparing large local databases
6. If possible, use Neon directly and do not depend on Replit production database cloning
Show me the exact files changed.
My recommendation

At this point:

GitHub push: done
Replit import: unnecessary right now
Current Replit: only worth one more attempt after startup is simplified
Best medium-term deployment: Railway

So the real answer is:
Replit is timing out because startup and deploy are still too heavy, not because GitHub is missing.

Paste your main.py / FastAPI startup section and replit deploy/run config, and I’ll tell you exactly what to cut.