Good — I can see exactly what exists. The current ClinicalToolsPanel handles BMI/BSA/eGFR. The hyaluronidase_helper is just a note block, not a real calculator. The ToolsPage at /tools exists but its content isn't in the codebase bundle. Building the full Epocrates-grade tools page now — one file, all tools, proper /tools route.Created a file, read a fileCreated a file, read a fileOne file — the complete /tools page. Here's the integration patch and why this builds daily habit:
To wire it in — in App.tsx, the /tools route already exists pointing to ToolsPage. Just replace the import:
tsx// REPLACE:
import ToolsPage from "@/pages/tools";
// WITH:
import ToolsPage from "@/pages/tools-epocrates";
No route change, no nav change needed. The "Tools" button in the header already links to /tools.

What makes Epocrates a daily habit — and how this matches it
Epocrates has three properties that drive daily opens: instant results (no network call, everything is local), high specificity (not "consult your training" but actual numbers), and contextual precision (region matters, indication matters, product matters).
The existing AesthetiCite hyaluronidase calculator was area × severity × 50 — a flat formula with no anatomical awareness. A clinician treating the tear trough (150 IU baseline, thin skin, high risk) gets the same number as one treating the masseter (600 IU, flood technique). That's wrong and not useful.
Tab 1 — Hyaluronidase is the biggest improvement. Every region has its own base dose, needle gauge, injection plane, specific technique notes, and a high-risk flag for vascular danger zones. Vascular occlusion severity overrides to minimum 1500 IU regardless of region. Volume-adjusted dosing (if 1.5ml was injected → minimum 450 IU) is calculated automatically. The output is copy-ready in one tap.
Tab 2 — Toxin Dilution builds a live concentration table showing exactly how many units are in every common volume increment (0.025ml → 0.5ml). This is what every injector calculates manually before every session. Done in one view.
Tab 3 — Toxin Dosing is the Epocrates drug dosing lookup equivalent. Every major region, both Botox and Dysport doses, anatomy warnings ("avoid < 1cm above brow"), and common adverse effects per region. Filterable. Copy per row. This alone is a daily reference.
Tab 4 — Protocol Lookup requires zero network call, zero LLM. The 6 core protocols are embedded in the component. A clinician with a vascular occlusion doesn't have time to wait for a streaming answer — they tap "Vascular Occlusion" and see the numbered steps immediately, with the key drug highlighted and escalation criteria at the bottom. Bridge to full /decide workflow.
Tab 5 — Product Reference is the first version of the filler database. 8 products with HA/non-HA status, crosslink level, duration, viscosity, indication, and specific risk note. The non-HA flag matters clinically — Sculptra and Radiesse cannot be dissolved.