What's correct
The three upgrade priorities are right. The competitive framing is right. The "AI chatbot vs AI clinical workflow" distinction is the correct strategic lens.
The enforceEvidenceGuarantee function is functionally sound but it is a subset of sanitizeGroundedResponse you already have. It doesn't strip inline citation markers from the answer text — it only rebuilds the citations array. If the LLM writes [1] in the answer body and there's no evidence, that marker survives. The full sanitizer from the previous patch handles both. Use that one, not this.

What's overstated
"Demo ready — you are already here."
Not quite. You are demo-ready after the citation patches are applied and the fake generateCitations() function is removed. Before those patches, showing AesthetiCite to a clinician carries real risk of displaying fabricated PubMed URLs. That's not a minor caveat — it's a trust-destroying moment in a clinical context.
"Gap is 3–4 weeks of work"
HNSW retrieval is not 3–4 weeks. The SQL index line shown (CREATE INDEX ... USING hnsw) is one line. The work around it is not:

Re-embedding your 206K document corpus with a consistent model
Tuning ef_construction and m parameters for recall vs latency
Validating retrieval quality on aesthetic medicine queries
Ensuring the async retriever pool handles the new index correctly

Realistic estimate: 3–4 weeks for a solid implementation, longer if embedding quality needs improvement.
"40–60% chance of first paying clinic within 6 months"
Probability estimates on B2B healthcare sales are not meaningful at this stage. What's meaningful: the first clinic conversation will be won or lost on the pre-procedure safety demo, not on literature retrieval quality. Focus there first.

The HNSW index line for reference
When you're ready, this is the correct migration for pgvector:
sql-- Run once against your chunks/embeddings table
CREATE INDEX idx_chunks_hnsw
ON chunks
USING hnsw (embedding vector_cosine_ops)
WITH (m = 16, ef_construction = 64);

-- Then update your retriever query
SELECT id, title, text, source_type
FROM chunks
ORDER BY embedding <=> $1::vector
LIMIT $2;
The <=> operator uses cosine distance. Current flat scan with pgvector works up to ~50K rows before latency degrades noticeably. At 206K documents you are likely already past that threshold — this is not a future optimisation, it is a current performance fix.